# Section 1.1 Notes

## Atomic and Molecular Statements
- A **statement** is declarative sentence that is either true or false
- If a statement cannot be divided into smaller statements, it is **atomic**.
    - i.e... <br>
    - Telephone numbers in the USA have 10 digits. <br>
    - The moon is made of cheese. <br>
    - 42 is a perfect square.
    - etc...

- If a statement CAN be divided into smaller statements, it is considered **molecular**.
    - i.e. Telephone numbers in the U.S. have 10 digits, and 42 is a perfect square
- Molecular statements are connected by words like "and", "if..., then...", "if and only if", and "not". The first 4 of those are considered **binary connectives**, whereas "not" is considered a **unary connective**   

- $3 + x = 12$ is not a statement, as it contains a variable. Since we don't know what $x$ is equal to, the statement may or may not be true, and right now it is neither true nor false.
    - To make this a statement, we could do a couple things to it:
    - "$3 + x = 12$, where $x = 9$ " (substitution)
    - "For all values of $x$, $3 + x = 12$" (quantification)

## Logical Connectives
- $P \wedge Q$ ($P$ and $Q$) is called a **conjunction**.
- $P \vee Q$ ($P$ or $Q$) is called a **disjunction**.
- $P \rightarrow Q$ (if $P$ then $Q$) is called an **implication** or **conditional**.
- $P \leftrightarrow Q$ ($P$ if and only if $Q$) is called a **biconditional**.
- $\neg P$ (not $P$) is called a **negation**.

## Truth Conditions for Connectives
- $P \wedge Q$ is true when both $P$ and $Q$ are true.
- $P \vee Q$ is true when $P$ or $Q$ or both are true.
- $P \rightarrow Q$ is true when $P$ is false or $Q$ is true (or both).
- $P \leftrightarrow Q$ is true when $P$ and $Q$ are both true, or both false.
- $\neg P$ is true when P is false.


Each of these representations can be represented in a table, which is known as a **truth table**. We use truth tables to represent every possibility of different truth statements, depending on whether each variable is true or false.

## Quantifiers and Predicates
- Quantifiers are things like "all" or "every"
  - i.e. all mammals have hair, every integer is even or odd

- Predicates are sentences that have a **free variable**.
  - These are often written in a similar form as a function:
  - i.e. predicate $P(x)$ to represent "$x$ is prime". We know that $P(7)$ is true because 7 is prime and that $P(8)$ is false.
 
- The **universal quantifier** is written as $\forall $ and is read, "for all." The **existential quantifier** is written $\exists$ and is read, "there exists" or "for some."


- A predicate becomes a statement when it is evaluated at some constant, or we can claim that some or all possible constants would make the resulting statement true or false. This is done using a **quantifier**

- Using quantifiers, we can claim (falsely) that all numbers are prime by writing $\forall x P(x)$, or we can claim (truthfully) that there exists prime numbers by writing $\exists x P(x)$

- We can write "every number is even or odd" in symbols like this:
  - $E(x) \vee O(x)$
  - $\forall x (O(x) \vee E(x))$

- $\forall x \exists y (y < x)$ is read "for every $x$ there is some $y$ such that $y$ is less than $x$ "
  - This statement could be true, depending on our **domain of discourse**.
 
- Any statement in the form "Every $P$ is a $Q$ " can be written as $\forall x(P(x) \rightarrow Q(x))$.

### Implicit Quantifiers
- The sentence $S(x) \rightarrow R(x)$ is NOT a statement, but we all know that IMPLIES:
    - $\forall x (S(x) \rightarrow R(x))$ .
 
The resulting statement is called the **universal generalization** of the original sentence.


## Reading Questions
1. Match each statement in symbols with its type of statement.
    - $P$ and $Q$ -- $P \wedge Q$
    - If $P$, then $Q$ -- $P \rightarrow Q$
    - $P$ or $Q$ -- $P \vee Q$
    - Not $P$ -- $\neg P$

2. Consider the statement "If $x > 3$, then $x$ is even." Which of the following statements are true about the sentence?
    - B: The universal generalization of the sentence is a statement.
    - C: If you substitute $10$ for $x$, the resulting statement is true.

## Practice Problems
1. For each statement below, decide whether it is an atomic statement, a molecular statement, or not a statement
    - Molecular statement: Some say the end is near, and some say we'll see Armageddon soon.
    - Atomic statement: Mom's coming 'round to put it back the way it ought to be.
    - Not a statement: Learn to swim.

2.  Classify each statement below as atomic, molecular, or not at all. If molecular, say what kind
    - Atomic statement: Everybody can be fooled
    - Atomic statement: Every natural number greater than 1 is either prime or composite.
    - Not a statement: Go to your room!
    - Molecular statement (disjunction): The Broncos will win the Super Bowl, or I'll eat my hat.
    - Molecular statement (negation): This shirt is not black.

3. Determine which molecular statement is true or false:
    - Impossible to determine: If $4$ is my favorite number, then $4 + 1$ is my favorite number.
    - False: 8 is my favorite number, and 3 is not prime.
    - Impossible to determine: 4 is my favorite number, or 4 is prime.
    - True: If 4 is prime, then 2 * 4 is prime.
    - Impossible to determine: If 3 is prime, then 3 is my favorite number.
    - Impossible to determine: 8 is my favorite number, and 4 is not prime.

4. Let $P(x, y)$ be the predicate, "person $x$ can befooled at time $y$." Match each statement with its representation in symbols.
    - Some people can be fooled all of the time: $\exists x \forall y P(x, y)$
    - Everyone can be fooled sometimes: $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$
    - It is always true that some people can be fooled: $\forall y \exists x P(x, y)$
    - Sometimes everyone can be fooled: $\exists y \forall x P(x, y)$

5. Your friend believes that you cannot fool everyone at the same time. What is another way of saying this, and how would you write that in symbols (using $P(x, y)$ to say that you can fool $x$ at time $y$)
    - A: Someone is never fooled: $\exists x \forall y \neg P(x, y)$
  
6. Regardless of your beliefs of how many people can be fooled at various times, what could you conclude if we reinterpret $P(x, y)$ to mean $x < y$ and only quantify over the natural numbers (so $\forall x$ means "For all natural numbers," and $\exists x$ means "There exists a natural number")? Select all of the following that apply.
    - A: $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$ is true.
    - E: No matter what $P(x, y)$ means, we can conclude that $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$ and $\exists y \forall x$ are NOT logically equivalent.

7. Let $P(x)$ be the predicate, "$16x + 1$ is even."
    - Is $P(11)$ true or false?
      - FALSE
    - What, if anything, can you conclude about $\exists x P(x)$ from the truth value of $P(11)$?
      - $\exists x P(x)$ could be true or could be false.
    - What, if anything, can you conclude about $\forall x P(x)$ from the truth value of $P(11)$?
      - $\forall x P(x)$ must be false.
     
8. Let $P(x)$ be the predicate, "$9x + 1$ is even."
    - Is P(13) true or false?
      - TRUE
    - What, if anything, can you conclude about $\exists x P(x)$ from the truth value of $P(13)$?
      - $\exists x P(x)$ must be true.
    - What, if anything, can you conclude about $\forall x P(x)$ from the truth value of $P(13)$?
      - $\forall x P(x)$ could be true or could be false.

9. Consider the sentence, $\exists x P(x, y) \rightarrow \forall x P(x, y)$. What can we say about this sentence? Select all that apply.
    - A: The universal generalization of the sentence is a statement.
    - C: The sentence is not a statement because $y$ is a free variable.

10. Suppose $P(x, y)$  is some binary predicate defined on a very small domain of discourse: just the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4. For each of the 16 pairs of these numbers, $P(x, y)$  is either true or false, according to the following table ($x$  values are rows, $y$ values are columns). Use the table (in the book) to decide whether the statements are true or false.
    - $\exists y \forall x P(x, y)$
      - FALSE
    - $\forall y \exists x P(x, y)$
      - TRUE
    - $\exists x \forall y P(x, y)$
      - TRUE
    - $\forall x \exists y P(x, y)$
      - FALSE
     
## Additional Exercises
1. Suppose $P$ and $Q$ are the statements: $P$: Jack passed math. $Q$: Jill passed math.
    - Translate "Jack and Jill both passed math" into symbols:
      - $P \wedge Q$
    - Translate "If Jack passed math, then Jill did not" into symbols:
      - $P \rightarrow \neg Q$
    - Translate "$P \vee Q$" into English:
      - Jack and/or Jill passed math. 
    - Translate "$\neg (P \wedge Q) \rightarrow Q$" into English:
      - If either Jack or Jill failed math, then Jill passed math.
    - Suppose that if Jack passed math, so did Jill. What can you conclude if you know that:    
    - i) Jill passed math?
      - Jack may have passed or may have failed
    - ii) Jill did not pass math?
      - Jack did not pass math.
     
2. Translate into symbols. Use $E(x)$ for "$x$ is even" and $O(x)$ for "$x$ is odd."
    - No number is both even and odd.
      - $\forall x \neg (E(x) \wedge O(x))$
    - One more than any even number is an odd number.
      - $\forall x E(x) \rightarrow O(x + 1)$
    - There is a prime number that is even.
      - $\exists x (P(x) \wedge E(x))$
    - Between any two numbers there is a third number.
      - $\forall x \forall y (x + 1 < y \rightarrow \exists z (x < z < y))$
    - There is no number between a number and one more than that number.
      - $\forall x \neg \exists z (x < z < x + 1)

3. For each of the statements below, give a domain of discourse for which the statement is true, and a domain for which the statement is false.
    - $\forall x \exists y (y^2 = x)$.
      - True: all complex numbers + all positive real numbers
      - False: Integers, all real numbers
    - $\forall x \forall y (x < y \rightarrow \exists z (x < z < y))$.
      - True: all real numbers
      - False: all integers
    - $\exists x \forall y \forall z (y < z \rightarrow y \leq x \leq z)$
      - True: any single element set (as $y \nless z$)
      - False: real numbers