# 1.2 Notes: Implications

- An **implication** is a molecular statement of the form $P \rightarrow Q$.
    - P is considered the **hypothesis** (or **antecedent**)
    - Q is the **conclusion** (or **consequent**)
      - An implication is true provided that P is false or Q is true (or both), and is false if $P$ is true and $Q$ is false.

- The Pythagorean Theorem is not really $a^2 + b^2 = c^2$ in this context
    - We must use the universal generalization convention:
    - $\forall a, b, c \in \R (a^2 + b^2 = c^2)$

- The statement $P \rightarrow Q$ does not imply, necessarily, any *causal* relationship between the statements $P$ and $Q$, although there could still be one. 
    - "If $1 < 2$, then Euclid studied geometry" is a true implication, despite there being no direct causation
- Given the implication $P \rightarrow Q$...
    - The **converse** is the statement $Q \rightarrow P$
    - The **contrapositive** is the statement $\neg Q \rightarrow \neg P$
    - The **inverse** is the statement $\neg P \rightarrow \neg Q$
## Reading Questions
1. It happens to be true that all mammals have hair. Which of the following are also true?
    - A: Having hair is a necessary condition for being a mammal
    - B: If an animal doesn't have hair, then it is not a mammal
    - D: An animal is a mammal only if it has hair.
2. Give an example of a true implication (written out in words) that has a false converse. Explain why your implication is true and why the converse is false.
    - If humans have 3 legs, then 1=1.

## Practice Problems
1. In my safe is a sheet of paper with two shapes drawn on it in colored crayon. One is a diamond, and the other is a circle. Each shape is drawn in a single color. Suppose you believe me when I tell you that, if the diamond is purple, then the circle is blue. What do you therefore know about the truth value of the following statements?
    - If the circle is blue, then the diamond is purple. (impossible to determine)
    - The diamond and the circle are both blue. (impossible to determine)
    - The diamond and the circle are both purple. (false)
    - If the circle is not blue, then the diamond is not purple. (true)
    - The diamond is not purple, or the circle is blue. (true)

2. Suppose the statement, "If the circle is orange, then the square is purple," is true. Assume also that the converse is false. Classify each statement below as true or false (if possible).
    - The circle is orange. (false)
    - The square is purple. (true)
    - The circle is orange if and only if the square is not purple. (true)
    - The circle is orange if and only if the square is purple. (false)

3. Consider the statement, "If you will give me magic beans, then I will give you a cow." Decide whether each statement below is the converse, the contrapositive, or neither.
    - If you will not give me magic beans, then I will not give you a cow. (neither)
    - If you will give me magic beans, then I will not give you a cow. (neither)
    - You will give me magic beans, and I will not give you a cow. (neither)
    - If I will give you a cow, then you will give me magic beans. (converse)
    - If I will not give you a cow, then you will not give me magic beans. (contrapositive)
    - If I will give you a cow, then you will not give me magic beans. (neither)

4. You have discovered an old paper on graph theory that discusses the viscosity of a graph (which for all you know, is something completely made up by the author). A theorem in the paper claims that “if a graph satisfies condition (V), then the graph is viscous.” Which of the following are equivalent ways of stating this claim? Which are equivalent to the converse of the claim?
    - Satisfying condition (V) is a necessary condition for a graph to be viscous. (converse)
    - For a graph to be viscous, it is sufficient for it to satisfy condition (V). (original)
    - A graph is viscous only if it satisfies condition (V). (converse)
    - Every viscous graph satisfies condition (V). (converse)
    - For a graph to be viscous, it is necessary that it satisfies condition (V). (converse)

5. Which of the following statements are equivalent to the implication, "if you win the lottery, then you will be rich," and which are equivalent to the converse of the implication?
    - You will win the lottery if you are rich. (converse)
    - You will be rich if you win the lottery. (original)
    - You will be rich only if you win the lottery. (converse)
    - It is sufficient to win the lottery to be rich. (original)
    - Either you don’t win the lottery or else you are rich. (original)

## Additional Exercises

1. Translate into English:
    - $\forall x (E(x) \rightarrow E(x + 2))$
      - For all values of $x$, if $x$ is even, then $x + 2$ is even.
    - $\forall x \exists y (sin(x) = y)$
      - For all values of x, there exists a y value where $sin(x) = y$
    - $\forall y \exists x (sin(x) = y)$
      - For all values of y, exists an x value where $sin (x) = y$
    - $\forall x \exists y(x^3 = y^3 \rightarrow x = y)$
      - For all values of x, there exists a y value where if $x^3 = y^3$, then $x = y$

2. Consider the statement, "If Oscar eats Chinese food, then he drinks milk."
    - Write the converse:
      - If Oscar drinks milk, then he eats Chinese food
    - Write the contrapositive:
      - If Oscar does not drink milk, then he does not eat Chinese food
    - Is it possible for the contrapositive to be false?
      - If Oscar does not drink milk but does eat Chinese food, then the contrapositive is false.
    - Suppose the original statement is true, and Oscar drinks milk. Can you conclude anything about his Chinese food eating habits? 
      - We cannot conclude anything about his Chinese food eating habits, as the original statement and the contrapositive are both true without moving on to the second part.
    - Suppose the original statement is true, and Oscar does not drink milk. Can you conclude anything about his Chinese food eating habits?
      - We can conclude that Oscar does not eat Chinese food. We know this because the contrapositive is always true if the original is true, and so if he does not drink milk, then he does not eat Chinese food. 