# 1.3 Notes: Rules of Logic

- Logically equivalent statements are ones that will always have the same result
    - i.e. $P \rightarrow Q$ is logically equivalent to $\neg P \vee Q$: if one is true, the other is true, and if one is false, the other is false.

- Two statements are logically equivalent when P is true exactly when Q is true. This means that the two values will *always* hold the same value.
    - This is written as $P \equiv Q$

- We can check whether two statements are logically equivalent using a truth table:
    - If the columns of the two statements in the truth table are equal to each other in every row, then they are equal
- An implication is logically equivalent to its contrapositive:
    - $P \rightarrow Q \equiv \neg Q \rightarrow \neg P$

- When an entire statement is negated, we flip the sign from $\vee$ to $\wedge$, and vise versa:
    - etc. $\neg (P \vee Q) \equiv \neg P \wedge Q$

- Any implication can be written as a disjunction:
    - $P \rightarrow Q \equiv \neg P \vee Q$

- A negation of an implication can be written as a conjunction:
    - $\neg (P \rightarrow Q) \equiv P \wedge \neg Q$
    - This is because implications are only true if the hypothesis is true *and* the conclusion is false.

## Practice Problems
1. Make a truth table for $(P \wedge Q) \rightarrow (P \vee Q)$ (filling in the gaps left to right):
      - T, T, T
      - F, T, T
      - F, T, T
      - F, F, T

2. Make a truth table for $\neg Q \vee (Q \rightarrow P)$ (filling in the gaps left to right):
      - F, T, T
      - T, T, T
      - F, F, F
      - T, T, T
      - What can you conclude about $P$ and $Q$ if you knew the statement was false?
         - C: That $P$ is false and $Q$ is true.
3. Make a truth table $\neg P \wedge (Q \rightarrow R)$ (filling in gaps left to right):
      - F, T, F
      - F, F, F
      - F, T, F
      - F, T, F
      - T, T, T
      - T, F, F
      - T, T, T
      - T, T, T
4. D: Yes, because the columns are always identical

## Additional Exercises
1. You stumble upon two trolls playing Stratego [...]:
      - Where $P$ is that they are cousins and $Q$ being that both are knaves:
      - For them to both be knights, both of these statements must be true. In a truth table, there is only one row possible for this:
          - $P$ is false, $Q$ is true, so $P \rightarrow Q$ and $P \vee Q$
      - But wait, the statement Q is that both are knaves, and if they both knaves, they cannot both be knights.
      - There is no scenario in which both are knights
2.  Next you come upon three trolls, helpfully wearing name tags [...] determine the presuasion of each troll:
      - $P$ means Pat is a knight, $Q$ means Quinn is a knight, and $R$ means Ryan is a knight
      - Pat's statement: $(P \vee Q) \rightarrow R$
      - Quinn's statement: $R \wedge (P \rightarrow Q)$
      - Ryan's statement: $\neg Q \wedge (P = R)$
      - Using the truth table, we can find who is a knight and who is a knave by finding the instances where the troll's identity and the statement hold the same value
      - Using this, we can find that $P$ is true, $Q$ is false, and $R$ is true. This means Pat is a knight, Quinn is a knave, and Ryan is a knight
3. Consider the statement about a party, "If it’s your birthday or there will be cake, then there will be cake"
   1. P - it's your birthday; Q - there will be cake
   2. Translate this into symbols:
      1. $(P \vee Q) \rightarrow Q$
   3. Assuming the statement is true, what (if anything) can you conclude if you know there will be cake?
      1. We cannot conclude anything based on this, as, if there will be cake, the statement would be true regardless of whether or not it was your birthday
   4. Assuming the statement is true, what (if anything) can you conclude if you know there will not be cake?
      1. We can conclude that it is not your birthday, as, if the conclusion is false (which it is, in this case), then the hypothesis must also be false for the statement to be true
   5. Suppose you found out that the statement was a lie. What can you conclude?
      1. We can conclude that it is your birthday and there will not be any cake. 
4. Geoff Poshingten is out at a fancy pizza joint and decides to order a calzone. When the waiter asks what he would like in it, he replies, "I want either pepperoni or sausage. Also, if I have sausage, then I must also include quail. Oh, and if I have pepperoni or quail, then I must also have ricotta cheese."
    1. Translate Geoff's order into logical symbols:
       1. P - pepperoni; S - sausage, Q - quail, R - ricotta cheese
       2. $P \vee S$
       3. $S \rightarrow Q$
       4. $(P \vee Q) \rightarrow R$
    2. The waiter knows that Geoff is either a liar or a truth-teller (so either everything he says is false, or everything is true). Which is it?
       1. If Geoff does not get sausage, then his second statement MUST be true, and so therefore he cannot be a complete liar.
    3. What, if anything, can the waiter conclude about the ingredients in Geoff’s desired calzone?
       1. Since Geoff must be a truth teller, we know that there must be ricotta cheese: in the truth table, where all 3 statements are true, $R$ (ricotta cheese) is present in all 4 rows.
5. Determine whether the following two statements are logically equivalent: $\neg (P \rightarrow Q)$ and $P \wedge \neg Q$. Explain how you know you are correct.
    1. If we make a truth table with all values of P and Q, we can see that $\neg (P \rightarrow Q)$ is always equivalent to $P \wedge \neg Q$, meaning the statements are logically equivalent.
6. Simplify the following statements (so that negation only appears right before variables):
   1. $\neg (P \rightarrow \neg Q)$
      1. $\neg (\neg P \vee \neg Q)$
      2. $\neg \neg P \wedge \neg \neg Q$
      3. $P \wedge Q$
   2. $(\neg P \vee \neg Q) \rightarrow \neg (\neg Q \wedge R)$
      1. $\neg (\neg P \vee \neg Q) \vee \neg(\neg Q \wedge R)$
      2. ($P \wedge Q) \vee Q \vee \neg R$
   3. $\neg ((P \rightarrow \neg Q) \vee \neg (R \wedge \neg R))$
      1. $R \wedge \neg R$ is always false, $\therefore$ $\neg (R \wedge \neg R)$ is always TRUE. 
      2. $\neg (True)$
      3. False
   4. It is false that if Sam is not a man then Chris is a woman, and that Chris is not a woman.
      1. $S$ - Sam is a man; $C$ - Chris is a woman
      2. $\neg (\neg S \rightarrow C) \wedge \neg C$
      3. $\neg (S \vee C) \wedge \neg C$
      4. $(\neg S \wedge \neg C) \wedge \neg C$
      5. Sam is not a man and Chris is not a woman.
7. Use De Morgan’s Laws and any other logical equivalence facts you know to simplify the following statements. Show all your steps. Your final statements should have negations only appear directly next to the sentence variables or predicates ($P$, $Q$, $E(x)$, etc.), and no double negations. It would be a good idea to use only conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations.
   1. $\neg ((\neg P \wedge Q) \vee \neg (R \vee \neg S))$
      - $(\neg (\neg P \wedge Q) \wedge (R \vee \neg S))$
      - $(P \vee \neg Q) \wedge (R \vee \neg S)$
        - Truth table to confirm:
            ```
            +-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
            |   P   |   Q   |   R   |  ~((~P and Q) or ~(R or ~S))  |  (P or ~Q) and (R or ~S)  |
            |-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+---------------------------|
            | True  | True  | True  |             True              |           True            |
            | True  | True  | False |             True              |           True            |
            | True  | False | True  |             True              |           True            |
            | True  | False | False |             True              |           True            |
            | False | True  | True  |             False             |           False           |
            | False | True  | False |             False             |           False           |
            | False | False | True  |             True              |           True            |
            | False | False | False |             True              |           True            |
            +-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+---------------------------+
            ```

   2. $\neg ((\neg P \rightarrow \neg Q) \wedge (\neg Q \rightarrow R))$
      - $\neg ((P \vee \neg Q) \wedge (Q \vee R))$
      - $\neg (P \vee \neg Q) \vee \neg (Q \vee R)$
      - $(\neg P \wedge Q) \vee (\neg Q \wedge \neg R)$
        - Truth table to confirm:
            ```
            +-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+-----------------------------+
            |   P   |   Q   |   R   |  ~((~P => ~Q) and (~Q => R))  |  (~P and Q) or (~Q and ~R)  |
            |-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+-----------------------------|
            | True  | True  | True  |             False             |            False            |
            | True  | True  | False |             False             |            False            |
            | True  | False | True  |             False             |            False            |
            | True  | False | False |             True              |            True             |
            | False | True  | True  |             True              |            True             |
            | False | True  | False |             True              |            True             |
            | False | False | True  |             False             |            False            |
            | False | False | False |             True              |            True             |
            +-------+-------+-------+-------------------------------+-----------------------------+
            ```
8. Consider the statement, "If a number is triangular or square, then it is not prime"
      - Make a truth table: $(T \vee S) \rightarrow \lnot P$:
         ```
         +-------+-------+-------+------------------+
         |   T   |   S   |   P   |  (T or S) => ~P  |
         |-------+-------+-------+------------------|
         | True  | True  | True  |      False       |
         | True  | True  | False |       True       |
         | True  | False | True  |      False       |
         | True  | False | False |       True       |
         | False | True  | True  |      False       |
         | False | True  | False |       True       |
         | False | False | True  |       True       |
         | False | False | False |       True       |
         +-------+-------+-------+------------------+
         ```
      - If you believed the statement was *false*, what properties would a counterexample need to possess? Explain using your truth table:
        - For the statement to be false, T or S must be true, and P must also be true, as we can see on the truth table. This means that the number must be triangular or square, but not prime. 
      - If the statement were true, what could you conclude about the number 5657, which is definitely prime? Again, explain using the truth table.
        - If the number 5657 is prime and the statement is definitely true, then, as we can see on the truth table, if $P$ is true and the full statement is also true, there is only one possibility: T and S both being false.