# 1.4 Notes

### Introduction
- A proof has 2 different parts:
    - The logical structure of a proof, aka the *skeleton* or *scaffolding* of the proof
    - The mathematical content of the proof, like what concepts it uses, how it shows understanding, etc
- We will see the difference between those two different ways

### Direct Proof
- A **direct proof** is the most simple way of doing a proof. 
- To prove $P \rightarrow Q$:
    - Assume $P$ is true
    - Deduce that $Q$ is true from that fact
- For example, proving that for all integers $n$, if $n$ is even, $n^2$ is even would go like this:
    - Assume that $n$ is even
    - Therefore, $n = 2k$
    - Therefore, $n^2 = (2k)^2 = 4k^2 = 2(2k^2)$
    - Since $2k^2$ is an integer, $n^2$ is even

### Proof by Contrapositive
- Remember from previous sections that an implication $P \rightarrow Q$ is logically equivalent to its contrapositive, $\neg Q \rightarrow \neg P$.
- Proof by contrapositive is simply a direct proof of the contrapositive of the implication.
- Finding whether for all integers $n$, if $n^2$ is even, $n$ is even would look like this:
    - Assume that $n$ is odd
    - $n = 2k + 1$
    - $n^2 = (2k + 1)^2 = 4k^2 + 4k + 1 = 2(2k^2 + 2k) + 1$
    - Since $2k^2 + 2k$ is an integer, we can see that $n^2$ is not even

### Proof by Contradiction
- To prove something by contradiction, we start by assuming that the statement is false. We then try to derive something contradictory (i.e. $P \land \neg P$)
- For example, to prove that $\sqrt{2}$ is irrational:
    - Assume that $\sqrt{2}$ is rational, and so therefore it can be written as a simple fraction $\frac{a}{b}$, in lowest terms.
    - $2 = \frac{a^2}{b^2}$
    - $2b^2 = a^2$
    - Therefore, $a^2$ is even, and $a$ is even
    - $a = 2k$ and $a^2 = 4k^2$
    - $2b^2 = 4k^2$
    - $b^2 = 2k^2$
    - Therefore $b^2$ is even and $b$ is even
    - This means that $\frac{a}{b}$ is not in lowest terms, meaning $\sqrt{2}$ cannot be written as a fraction and is irrational.

### Summary
- Direct: Assume $P$, deduce $Q$
- Contrapositive: Assume $\neg Q$, deduce $\neg P$
- Contradiction: Assume $\neg(P \rightarrow Q)$, deduce a contradiction

### Problem 14
- Prove that $log(7)$ is irrational:
    - Assume that $log(7)$ can be written in as a fraction $\frac{a}{b}$ in simplest form.
    - $log(7) = \frac{a}{b}$
    - $7 = 10^\frac{a}{b}$
    - $(7)^b = (10^\frac{a}{b})^b$
    - $7^b = 10^a$
    - All powers of 10 are even, as it is an even number
    - All powers of 7 are odd, as it is an odd number
    - Therefore, $7^b$ cannot equal $10^a$ for any integer values of $a$ and $b$ and $log(7)$ is irrational.

### Problem 15
- Prove that there are no integer solutions to the equation $x^2 = 4y + 3$
    - Assume that there are integer solutions to the equation
    - $x^2$ being equal to $4y + 3$ means that $x^2$ must be 3 more than a multiple of 4.
    - If $x$ is even, then $x^2 = 4k^2$, and $x^2$ must be divisible by 4.
    - If $x$ is odd, then $x^2 = (2k + 1)^2 = 4k^2 + 4k + 1$
    - We can see clearly that if we divide that whole expression $4k^2 + 4k + 1$ by 4, we would be left with a remainder of 1, not 3 as we would need for the original equation. 
    - This means that there are no even or odd integers solutions to the equation.