# 1.5 Notes

### Preview
- So far, we have used the logical form of a statement to build the scaffolding of a proof
- This is not all we need to know, though, and creating the proof skeleton requires an understanding of the mathematical objects and structures the proofs are about. This could come from definitions, intuition, or just learning that comes with time.

### Proofs about Sets
- If we have these two sets:
    - $A$ = { $1, 2, 3, 4, 5$ }
    - $B$ = { $x \in \N : x < 10$ }
- Then we can say that $A$ is a *subset* of $B$, written as $A \subseteq B$
- We could also say that $B$ is a *superset* of $A$
- $A$ could be a *proper subset* of B, written as $A \subset B$, given that $A \subseteq B$ and $A ≠ B$. 
- We can also prove things about elements that are not short enough to write down all of the elements (even if they are infinite). Here are examples:
    - Let $n$ be an element of $B$. Therefore $n^2 < 10$, by the definition of $B$. Since $4^2 = 16$, we know that $n < 4$. By the definition of $A$, and the fact that $4 < 5$ we see that $n \in A$.
- For any sets $A$, $B$, and $C$, if $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq C$, then $A \subseteq C$
    - Proof: Let $x$ be an element of $A$. Since $A \subseteq B$, we know that $x \in B$. Since $B \subseteq C$, we know that $x \in C$. Therefore, $A \subseteq C$
    - We can use this proposition for other things, too, and it is called an *element chasing* proof.

### Proofs about Functions
- The function $f : A \rightarrow B$ assigns each element of the set A (the domain) to exactly one element of the set B (the codomain)
- This type of function is *injective* (or one-to-one), provided that every element in $B$ is the image of at most one element in $A$. In other words, no element in $B$ is the *output* for more than one *input* from A.
- Given that $f : A \rightarrow B$ is a function with $A$ and $B$ being finite sets. If $|A| > |B|$, then $f$ is not injective
- Suppose a class has 25 students:
    - Make the domain the students (there are 25) and the codomain the months (there are 12), and we can see that the function is not injective, and therefore at least 2 students share the same birth month

### Proofs about Relations
- A relation on a set $A$ is a set of ordered pairs of elements from the set. It is a way to describe a type of relationship between elements of $A$. Whenever we make a statement about 2 elements of a set, we are making a relation. 
- Some relations use special symbols like "$=$", "$\leq$", "$\perp$". When we talk about a general relation, we use $\sim$ and write $x \sim y$, or use a capital letter like $R$ and write $R(x, y)$ or $xRy$ or $(x, y) \in R$ (all mean the same thing)
- A relation $R$ on a set $A$ is *transitive*, given that for all $x$, $y$, $z$ $\in$ $A$,if $xRy$ and $yRz$, then $xRz$

### Proofs about Graphs
- A *graph* is a set $V$ of vertices and a set $E$ of edges. The edges are 2-element subsets of the vertices, and we can think of them as relationships between the vertices. 
- We can use graphs to represent many real-world problems. For example, the vertices of a graph might represent people at a party. 
- We can find the degree of a vertex by adding up the amount of edges that touch that vertex, or by counting the amount of times that that value shows up in the edges
- In all graphs, there must be an even amount of odd-degree vertices
    - Proof by contradiction:
      - Imagine there is a graph with an odd number of vertices with odd degree
      - The sum of the degrees of all of the odd-degree vertices would then be odd
      - The sum of the even-degree vertices would be even
      - The sum of an odd and an even number is odd, so therefore the sum of all degrees would be odd.
      - The number of an edges in a graph is half the sum of degrees, because each edge contributes two to the sum of degrees (as it touches 2 vertices)
      - This means that there cannot be a graph with an odd number of vertices with odd degree

### Practice Problems
- Given sets $A$ and $B$, the **intersection** of $A$ and $B$, written $A \cap B$, is the set of all elements that are in both $A$ and $B$. Suppose you wanted to prove that if $A \cap B = B$ then $B \subseteq A$. Which would be a good start to this proof if you used a direct proof?
    - B: Let $b$ be an element of $B$.
- Suppose you wanted to prove that for all sets $A$ and $B$ that $A \cap B \subseteq A$. Which of the following would be a good start to a proof by contradiction?